if you got pler ftis that unmistakable searing burning pain right here in your heel well I'm going to help you fix it today with this this a wall and definitely not this what's up guys Jeff Cavalier athletes.com So today we're fixing that planner fascia of yours by guess what not really addressing your planner fascia because it's not the problem as a matter of fact it's just the symptom but the root cause of what's making yours inflamed right now is coming from something else and I'm going to show you exactly what it is so this little piece of tissue the planer fascia sits on the bottom of your foot and this job is just basically to connect from the heel towards your toes and provide a little bit of support a little bit of support for your arch especially in standing but when you go to actually move walk or run you cannot be asking this piece of tissue to be the main support for your foot or you're going to lead to the same problem you've got right now while you're on this video because you're asking it to do way too much much more than it can handle especially esally if you're overweight but it is a good idea to start focusing on what the heel is doing because that is where the problem starts when your foot makes contact with the ground this heel actually has to turn out biomechanically to do it right by kicking out it actually loosens up the bones of your midfoot here turning your foot into a mobile adapter that can accommodate the forces from the ground and dissipate them up the chain so you don't get a lot of stress in your ankles knees hips or low back and that's a good thing however when your foot comes through and now has to push off to take the next step you have to have the ability to get that heel turned Inward and what that does is actually locks up those bones in your midfoot causing your foot to now become a rigid lever that you could actually Propel yourself off of with good effective Force what's happening to you though is your foot is not a lever when it needs to be it's still a mobile adapter and by doing that now you have too much looseness in the middle of the foot and the only thing that could actually support your next step is this tiny little piece of tissue that is not equipped to do it and by the way it's an inflamed tissue at this point so just rubbing a ball on top of that inflamed tissue is likely just going to make it more inflamed and more painful so that's not what we have to do instead we have to focus on getting this heel into the right position and to do that we need to stand up so let me walk you over to the wall because that's where we're going to solve our problems but pay attention to the walk as I get over there because this is again what's causing your problem when you walk you're supposed to be able to have your ankle here get into this dorsal Flex position but if you have tight calves you're not going to be able to get into this position or at least not the way you should because when we take our step you want that heel like I just showed you to be able to kick out to create the looseness in the midfoot that adapts to the surface and lets you absorb those forces so you don't get anything up and down the kinetic chain here but when I go to push off that heel has to change that position it needs to be able to invert to lock up that midfoot create a good rigidity there that can Propel you forward that's what happens every sing single step you take if however this heel is still kicked out what's going to happen it's still going to be loose in the midfoot and by doing that now you're going to ask this little piece of tissue to absorb all that propulsion force and guess what it's going to do it's just going to start tearing and pulling and causing Spurs and all kinds of things that you don't want so you need to know how to stretch your calves out because you might think to yourself oh I know I'm just going to do this I've seen calf stretches before just let them hang off the edge of a stair or something like that and I'm good to go no because you're not replicating the forces that you're undergoing when you're stepping which is causing all that transmitted Force to that one structure that can't handle it so you do this you go into a wall okay now if I want to stretch out this leg over here you drop the foot back and again you're probably thinking I I've done this before this doesn't really help that's because this isn't enough either because what's the position of the of that heel when you're doing this stretch likely as you're leaning in it's actually caving down this way and kicking out so you're in that mobile foot State when I need you to be in that rigid lever state so how do we do that we have to roll that ankle out a little bit right just get into that heel the outer portion of the heel right about here you want to lean into okay and then I just want to step in like that and I can step a little bit across the body instead of straight in across the body because that's going to make me get a little bit more out onto the edge of that heel okay now I've got the foot in exact exactly the position that it needs to be in training myself to get more flexibility through my calf in a good way that's replicating the thing that I don't have right now exactly the thing that I'm missing that's causing all these these Steps step after step after step to transmit way too much force into that planer fascia causing the inflammation you're just feeling the inflammation it's not the planer fascia's fault it's the mechanics elsewhere so now you do that stretch moving forward dynamically about 10 or 12 times just in here like that or get in there and hold it for about 20 seconds at a time but just make sure you're doing the stretch the next thing you can do is because we're three-dimensional people we move around in different planes you can step across the body and stretch it that way so I'm still leaning into the wall to stretch but I'm stepping across so now I'm working this plane of motion but I'm leaning into the wall stretching that Cal down keeping that heel down outer edge of the heel okay then we could even get some rotational stress in there too cuz sometimes we move in that direction so what you want to do is step it across this way try to rotate try to turn your hips all of them stepping in this direction so you're causing that outer heel to take the brunt again keeping it on the ground leaning in and getting that stretch so just like this if you do this stretch every single day a few this way a few stepping across the body a few stepping that way over time that will alleviate the stress on the planter fascia so it could finally calm down you're trying to walk around every day constantly reinflation and it never goes away trust me I know how long this thing can stay but if you start to stretch this you get more Mobility now you walk around you're like oh this feels really good okay that's number one one other thing to keep in mind because our body is a kinetic chain if you evaluate yourself and you're like wow my calves are really tight you know right away that's your problem so focus on that and you'll be good if you do this you have heel pain but your your calves really aren't that tight or don't really feel a good stretch when you do this then the second place you need to look is right here in the hip because I find that it's almost always the only other place that causes this and what happens here is you get a weakness in this one muscle called the glute medius and what that does is it causes your hips to drop when you take a step your hips drop like this okay if this drops what happens on the opposite side as my hip drops here this foot caves down again in the heel kicks out and we want to have that heel in position when we Propel so if you have weakness on this side of the body you can have PL ftis on this side of the body or vice versa so how do you strengthen That Let's Pretend This is the weak hip your wall is your friend again all you got to do is get up against the wall the weak hip is on the outside so in this case likely your planet fastis is on this side against the wall if it's happening on both sides you're going to work both hips you lift up this foot the one closest to the wall you stay on this leg like here drop it out just let it drop get loose get lazy and then when you drive back squeeze the muscles of the hip straight into the wall like that drop it out squeeze right from here straight across and it doesn't matter how much you're squatting or how much you deadlift this is a different muscle and a different PL of motion you need to strengthen this again you can have a lot of lifting history and still have a really bad PL fastis squeeze over here get that good contraction you'll feel the weakness do these for about about 12 to 15 repetitions again maybe two times a day three times a day strengthen up the hip and I promise you if it's not the calves it's the hips if you do both those things I promise you it's going to go away if you're looking for ways to fix back pain that might already be happening because of your in attention to the right fix for planer fast you're going to want to watch my video on how to fix low back pain here I actually show you some other exercises you can do to strengthen that glute medius if you found it helpful guys make sure you leave your comments below anything else you want me to fix I'll do that for you just leave it down in the comments below all right guys turn on those notifications so you never miss a video when I put one out see you. plantar fascitis can be a real painful problem and lasts for months, actually. It typically affects people between the age of 40 and 70. - First, we're gonna show you what is causing the problems with a little anatomy lesson. - That's right. Let's get to it, Mike. All right, my favorite part of the program. Mike has volunteered to sacrifice the bottom of the foot so we could put some colors on there. The green represents the location of the plantar fascia. It's a very tough tissue that connects from the base of the toes all the way to the calcaneus, or the heel. The red part represents where a vast majority of my patients have a very tender spot. That's where the fascia is actually tearing away from the bone or the calcaneus. - So when most people think of the plantar fascia, they just look at the part we showed on my foot, but realistically, it's part of a longer chain, and it actually runs from your great toe here up around the Achilles tendon into the calf and goes behind the knee. All this connects into one long segment - And this is critical for how you treat it. I'm very interested, you called it the great toe. - It's super great. - So now we're gonna show you five options on how to treat plantar fasciitis at home so that you get rid of it as soon as possible. And you're gonna see why we demonstrated or actually show the whole length of the tissue that's involved with the treatment. You'll see it'll all make sense. Now, a very common symptom are when you get out of the bed in the morning, you put weight on your foot, you get severe foot pain. If that's you, this is something that will help. Because if you don't do anything about that, that'll make the healing process go on for weeks or longer. So let's explain it briefly. When you sleep, your foot is plantar flex. The plantar fascia actually starts to heal in that fashion. Now, when you stand up and dorsa flex and put weight on your foot, that stretches the plantar fascia, and the injured hotpot right here actually gets torn apart, re-injuring it every morning, limiting the healing process, and it can last forever. So what do you do about it? We put a splint on. They call it a night splint. They're very common. You can buy a number of them on the internet or wherever you'd like to. Now, this is Mike's. He's been wearing one, not right now, but you've wore this. And you put it on. Can you go down? Now, normally you would sleep like this. Now, this is adjustable. You essentially pull it up and strap it down like this. Mike, can you tell what works well for you on this? - So this isn't going to actually feel like a stretch. It's just gonna keep your foot in a neutral position. So it's not like it's gonna be tight when you put it on. Typically what you can do is wear it right away when you go to bed. You may wake up and your calf may feel tight. If that's the case, maybe not start with it on right away. But if you wake up in the middle of the night for whatever reason, say you use the bathroom, maybe put it on then before you go back to bed. That way your foot is in its position before you get up in the morning, because this is how you want to be to not tear that plantar fascia again. Now, I didn't have plantar fascitis, but it also works for other ankle or calf issues. - All right. Now, I've had a number of patients that the only difference they did in treatment for their plantar fasciitis is to wear a night splint. And they noticed it immediately getting out and out of bed in the morning. Much less pain, and it started to heal, and throughout the day, much greater progress, taking care of the problem. Okay, now, if you do not have a splint like Mike has, and you don't want to get one, you can heal this without it. But before you get out of bed in the morning, you do need to do some range of motion and specific stretches. This morning treatment, before you get out of bed, we're gonna do some stretching. Now, keep in mind, we got the blue fascia whole train right here. Now, what you're gonna do to start is simply range of motion like this. Up in the air. You can rest your foot here. And do at least 10 repetitions. It's gonna be a little sore at first, especially when you go up. Do it until it feels better and loosened up. Then the next step is actually do some stretching. Now, the thing is, is remember this goes up to the toe. You could stretch like this to get the fascia and the heel, as well as the calf, and hold it. You can hold 15 to 30 seconds, or stretch and relax, stretch and relax. If it's really painful, start gently and then progress on. After about 10 repetitions, it should be good. Remember the big toe, or as Mike calls it properly, the great toe, pull it back and stretch that. That's a critical stretch, and it's easy to do as well, which is really nice. - Now, the next step to do before you get out of bed is to actually do a little bit of massage to the plantar fascia region on the bottom of the foot. You don't have to work the whole chain or train, as Brad just said before. So what you could do is circular motions, just the whole plantar fascia, which I've highlighted here. Or you could do a splaying massage, which you kind of bring your thumbs together and then pull apart like this. Whatever feels better for you, do that. You can do this for two to five minutes. If you wanna work around the painful area, and it feels good, especially after you massage it, that is fine. If it just makes it worse and really irritates it, you don't have to do that area. Just do the surrounding areas. Get that plantar fascia loosened up and ready to move before you start walking. - Good job. All right, so that isn't critical, that you stretch before you get out of bed. Do the massage, you know, a couple minutes. I don't know if you can go five minutes. Your fingers will probably get sore. We're gonna show some better option of that for throughout the day. Whatever you do, once you get up, put your shoes on relatively quick so that helps support the fascia, so you're not walking around barefoot initially. Do what feels good on your foot. Now we're gonna show you some more massaging you can do, because the more you can massage this throughout the day, might be two or three times, the better it is. And I've got a little hint right here in my hand. So obviously you need to take your shoes off. You can do this with your socks on. Whatever works well. Simply a golf ball, tennis ball, or lacrosse ball. Mike has an actual massage ball. You could use a soft ball. The rule is the harder the ball, the more aggressive and the smaller. Like, the golf ball is gonna be the most aggressive. At work you could just simply take your shoes off and put a ball underneath your desk, if that's the type of work you do, and massage it every couple hours. Mike, you have any more input? - They even sell little massage balls that are only like 3 to $5 with little nodules on them. That's what I have at home. It actually feels pretty good. - Right. When using the ball, the hardness of the ball and the size of the diameter makes a big difference. The most aggressive would be the golf ball. It's hard. It's small in diameter. But I would suggest starting with a tennis ball that gives a little bit, and then you can work that. And when that doesn't feel like it's hard enough or aggressive enough, then you can go to like a lacrosse ball and work that. And the most aggressive is the golf ball. This happens to be a Nitro number one. Okay, now another good option. If you happen to have a massage gun like this at home, take advantage of it. It'll save your hands and fingers. Either use the round head or the airhead that's soft. And don't get too aggressive right away. Don't overdo it, even with your hands. You can work that plantar fascia. And I would not go straight in on it. With the ball head, you can go sideways. Now, with the airhead, that doesn't work so good. But the airhead's softer. It's more forgiving. It should not hurt. You should feel like a good massage. Like Mike said, don't go over that painful spot. If it hurts, only do that if the massage actually makes it feel good after a few seconds. You can work that. Work that massage. Here, now this is a critical part. Seeing how we're working this, we're also gonna work the muscles up in this part of the chain. 'Cause when these muscles get tight, that puts stress on the tender area and then will make a significant difference on making it feel better. So you're gonna work this large calf muscle. Mike, do you have any input? You do this a lot. - I have some knots in my calf, so that's a little touchy for me. So I'm not gonna push as hard here. - Right. So if I have a knot right there, and it really hurts to go over that, don't beat it up. Actually work around that knot. Be gentle with it, and then you can get closer as it loosens up. You may spend three to five minutes with this and not get a sore hand. They're a wonderful tool. - So after you massage a calf muscle, it is good to stretch it as well. You can do this throughout the day. If you do not have any devices, you can simply go up to a wall like this. Let's say I'm gonna stretch my left calf. I'm gonna put it behind me. Have a straight knee like this. Notice that my toe is pointing forward. I'm not turning out like this. And the more I start to lean forward and look up, the more calf stretch I'll feel. If I'm back here, I don't feel anything. As soon as I start bending more and pushing, I will feel a good calf stretch there. - It is critical that you keep your heel to the floor, like Mike is doing here. Yes, if it lifts up, that does not make an effective stretch. So stretch like this. Now, another great benefit. Stretch with a straight knee, and then try and keep your heel on the floor and slightly flex the knee. That stretches a different muscle. You get the soleus that way versus a gastrocnemius. You don't need to know that, but actually just do that a few seconds each way to be complete, okay? Now, if you happen to have an incline board, this is mine, I actually made it. We have a video on how to make one very cheaply, if you're handy and you got some few tools. Otherwise you can buy them pretty cheap. This is my favorite way to stretch a calf. It just works better. It's not so much work, and it's a little more effective. Mike, do you have any comments on the incline board? - To make it more aggressive, if I'm standing here, I feel nothing. The closer my other foot gets even with the board or even in front of it, then you're gonna feel much more of a stretch. Again, you're gonna straighten your knee out. And yeah, this hits it well. - Yeah, they're a wonderful device. Now, this technique we're gonna show you is how to change your walking to take the stress and pain off that plantar fascia. Almost everyone, when they walk, they heel strike, and the force goes through their body, through their heel, and that puts a lot of stress on that fascia, that tender area. We need to change that. Mike is an excellent person to do this 'cause he's actually changed his walking to the soft knee, which actually helps the plantar fascitis strain. Ooh, go ahead, Mike. - So when you're going to land when you're walking with soft knees, you're gonna land more on your forefoot, or you can land with kind of a flat foot like this. The whole goal is to not be heel striking like this. So forefoot or flat foot, whatever's comfortable for you. When you're actually walking, what you're gonna do is take smaller steps. Notice I'm not gonna be stepping as far as normal. I'm going to be taking shorter steps, and I'm gonna be landing on my forefoot like this. As you get comfortable doing this, you might start to go more of a flat foot. It will take some time to get accustomed to. Your gait pattern is going to slow down initially, but over time, it'll start to return and feel more natural. Just make sure you're landing on your forefoot and you're not locking your knees out when you're walking. I'm having nice bent knees. - A good way to learn how to do this, I have found personally, is I walk around the house with my stocking foot or barefoot on a hard floor, and you can feel when your heel strikes in, in that normal pattern, versus the forefoot. It's much more comfortable, and it's like a quiet, soft walk, taking the stress. And you'll feel pain reduction on that painful heel as well. Nice job, Mike. Nice shirt. - Thanks. I don't know them. - (laughs) Now, if you're one of those people that's had plantar fascitis that's been bothering you a few weeks, take these steps to heart. Do them every day. It will improve, and you'll have progress and success. Good luck. And Mike has some more to say, don't you, Mike? - Yes. Another important key feature of plantar fascitis is your footwear you are wearing. We're not gonna talk about it in this video, but if you want to check out the video linked here, we explain it all in detail. - And you'll know why we have abused and cut holes in these shoes. - It's very clear. - These are Bob's shoes. We make him wear them all the time. (Brad laughs) ♪ Bob and Brad ♪ ♪ The two most famous physical therapists ♪ ♪ On the internet ♪
